[Music]
Well, it's great to have you. Thanks for
Thank you for being here.
Thanks for having me. Great to be here.
Yes. I've heard that your first startup
was written in small talk. Please
explain.
I don't know what there is to explain.
It's the best programming language. Um
well uh I had I'd worked on lisp and
lisp dialects uh before that and uh
actually I I worked on lisp web
frameworks and uh when we went to build
our first startup uh we we first wrote
it in we we first implemented it in
rails and then I found compared to lisp
that development process kind of
frustrating and I mean we don't need to
get into the full details but I thought
that continuationbased web frameworks
were really the right way to implement
web applications. uh there were no
continuations uh in
there's no continuation based framework
in in Ruby um and uh kind of searching
around I found that there was um a good
one that had just been written in small
talk and so I decided to play with it a
little bit and then I found that small
talk is actually this extremely
interesting development environment um
that had a lot a lot of the aspects of
lisp that I'd really appreciated there
like um you know and a fully interactive
environment with a proper debug bugger
uh so that you can you can edit the code
while um you know in the middle of some
web request or you know in deep in some
stack trace or something uh and you know
you could for example encounter an error
uh with some web request edit the code
to fix the error and then resume higher
up in the stack such that the entire web
request would just complete. And so
rather than this kind of annoying
feedback loop of having to add some log
statements and like do this binary
search to like find the problem and
eventually like deploy, you know, a
fixed version, you know, a process that
could take an hour, you could just like
literally inspect the stack frame, see
which variable has the wrong value, fix
it, like, you know, jump back up, hit
proceed, and have the whole thing work.
Anyway, the point is uh in the hunt for
this continuation based web framework uh
realized that small talk um in general
had just a much more powerful
development environment as compared to
Ruby slash as compared to basically
every other mainstream programming
language. Um and so we we decided to
yeah use it for the company which in
hindsight was I mean I don't know if it
was a terrible decision or not. The
reason I think one would think it would
be terrible uh is that it would be you
know hard to hire people and hard to
scale and you know whatever. It wasn't
hard to hire people or rather nobody
knew it but it was easy to teach them
the company.
Did they know before they joined?
No. No. But did they learned really
quickly? Um and then you know smart
people learn languages really quickly.
Uh so I don't I don't think that's
really a reason not to use a non-
mainstream language. The company didn't
work. I think for unrelated reasons. I
think just the idea wasn't that strong.
Um but we also chose Ruby for for
Stripe. So I don't know. I think maybe
the gains were not quite as large as I
hoped.
And was your small talk enthusiasm
shared by the acquirers of the startup?
And what was the dynamic? you know, was
there like this blissfully ignorant
management that foisted this small talk
codebase on a bunch of unsuspecting
developers that were then kind of like
piling it over, you know, or Yeah. What
what was the dynamic between the the
programmers management sort of what
happened to that small talk code base?
Yeah. Yeah.
Does it still live on somewhere?
I wish um and um I'm I'm 99% sure the
answer to that is no. Uh it um it the
company that acquired us was mainly a
talent acquisition. So um yeah, the the
code base itself was was less relevant.
Okay. And it was immediately sort of
just gone.
Yeah.
Okay. Gotcha. I've also heard that one
of your earliest programming projects
was working on an an AI bot written in
lisp. True
and it was it was something like a uh it
was a client for MSN.
I know where you found that, but that is
true.
Um and um I heard that you got kind of
nerd sniped by the idea of trying to get
it to pass the touring test.
Yes.
Um and I'm curious, what did you miss?
You know, why didn't you make chasht? Um
and well maybe a little bit more
seriously how did it work and what was
the state of neural networks at the time
and did you did you consider using um
any anticedants to the technology we use
today?
Yeah so so that was a project uh it was
um a little critter that used MSN
messenger uh which was you know all the
rage at the time. I guess that puts that
that's like maybe a specific kind of you
know sedimentary layer in the you know
chronology of different instant
messaging solutions and probably dates
me quite precisely. Um and it was a
really simple basian next word predictor
like there was nothing really that
sophisticated there to the extent there
was anything sophisticated was maybe
that it used like that the training data
was the conversations it itself had an
in MSN messenger rather than kind of
general text corpa and and you know it
it worked reasonably well and you know
it better versions looked a couple of
words ahead and and you know what have
you and a I mean it never really passed
the touring test where you know people
have actual suspicion they're trying to
you know exercise this this uh
discernment. Um but it certainly passed
some weaker versions of hearing test
where you know they they were
unsuspecting and you know people ended
up having quite quite lengthy
conversations with it. It and that was
part of how I discovered lisp and I
remember paradigms of AI programming by
Peter Norvig being a really formative
book and had you know all sorts of uh
interesting approaches there. Um, it
didn't have anything on neural networks,
I'm almost sure. And I never I mean, I'd
read some Marvin Minsky stuff, Society
of the Mind or whatever on on on neural
nets, but I never really seriously
looked at them. And I actually
experimented a lot with genetic
algorithms. Um, they were, I guess, more
practical on, you know, your own
computer. Like it's it's it takes a lot
of computer training neural nets. So, I
I experimented a lot with with genetic
algorithms and actually I use Vorjac,
the keyboard layout, because uh it's
more comfortable to type on than cwerty.
Um but uh but as does John, my um my
brother, so no one can ever use our our
computers, but um uh I wrote a genetic
um I don't know optimizer uh to uh to
figure out what the optimal keyboard
layout was. And it turns out it is in
fact basically V forjac um using a
genetic approach. Um so I went deep down
that rabbit hole, but I never really
played with neural networks. And I guess
that's why you know um that but probably
seven other 70 other reasons is why you
know um uh I did not create chd.
There is an old video of you being
interviewed I think after selling
automatic
um where you're asked you're asked about
small talk that's that's where I found
kind of that weird weird fact. I think
at the time people asked you why and one
of the things you said was I mean you
liked some features about small talk
list style languages and you predicted
and I think that this was circa maybe
2008 or something like that the mainline
C style programming languages would
increasingly borrow ideas from these
older programming languages and that
kind of has been the case in the
JavaScript Python ecosystems.
Um do you think that there are any
underrated ideas buried away in kind of
older more esoteric programming
languages uh that should be borrowed by
the main line? Yeah, it's been it's been
interesting how a lot of the ideas have
been kind of have been borrowed by the
JavaScript ecosystem and in a strange
way like through the web inspector.
Yeah.
Um where you have this I mean that
that's one of the richest run times in
some sense that people have you know
general general exposure to
I don't think JavaScript has first class
stack frames.
Um maybe there's some weird extension or
something where you can get that but but
you know um ECMAScript doesn't have
that. I'm pretty sure first class stack
frames actually let you do a lot of
other things for kind of obvious
reasons. So maybe that's very that's
kind of too specific. Um I mean I think
the idea of and and maybe this is what
cursor becomes. I think the basic idea
of as development environment and not
just text editor is really the right
idea and that's the thing I want to see
a return to. That's the thing that the
list machines had and genera that's the
thing that to some extent Mathematica
has. That's the thing that small talk
has and I think it's just such a mistake
that we have ended up with development
environments where there is such a
separation between the runtime and the
text editing and the um and the
environment in which the code
I mean
yeah well
the runtime and the place where the code
runs can be the same or different but
but they're kind of three maybe slightly
conceptually different things uh and in
those three environments they can all
coexist in the same place and I like I
mean still to this day I use Mathematica
a lot, not because I'm doing some
particularly arcane, you know, symbolic
Mathematics, but because it's just a
more efficient development environment.
Now, that's maybe a bit less true with
uh LLM's because the Mathematica, you
know, um Mathematica does not support
cursor style prompted development. Um
but uh but that I think is the core idea
that that I wish others would borrow and
VS code has been a step to some extent
slightly in that direction but I think
we could take it way further and it
would be really I mean what what I'd
love to see for example is uh when I
hover over a line of code um I would
like to see you know profiling
information about you know just the
runtime characteristics uh of that code
or that function or whatever. I would
like to see logging and error
information overlaid when I hover over a
variable. I would like to see um how uh
like the most common values that it
takes uh on in production these these
kinds of like just rich deep
integrations.
Are you a fan of inventing on principle
and and those yes um I think Brett leans
too much I mean I huge fan of Brett um
just he's such an incredible
you've been to dynamic land.
Yes. Okay.
Yeah. Um uh and and have supported it.
Uh, so hu huge fan of Brett. Um, the the
place that I've maybe differed or at
least that just resonates with me, you
know, somewhat less is Brett is really
into this idea of um obviously of uh
graphical and visual representations for
phenomena. And I think that works very
well in um certain domains like the
kinds of dynamical systems that you know
he has demonstrated some of the ideas
with.
I think it's often very hard to find
such useful spatial continuous
representations for arbitrary systems
like for various parts of Stripe. I'm
not quite sure what that would be and
I'm not sure even if we could find it,
you know, exactly how useful it would
be. Maybe it's just me. I reason much
more kind of symbolically and sort of
lexically uh than I do visually and
graphically. It might just be personal
preference, but I don't know. The kind
of uh paradigm breaking that he's been
engaged in, I think is hugely admirable.
Are you going to make a uh a a truly
integrated development environment?
So, we are playing with ideas around
letting the AI increasingly take time
into the background to uh run it as code
and react to the output.
And we think that this should all work
well together. Like, you know, we
focused a ton on inflow, speed, and
control. And uh we think that that's
really really important for AI is, you
know, to give programmers the control
over everything, have them understand
everything the AI is producing. Um, also
to give them really, really fast
iteration loops. Programmers hate
waiting for things. Um, but in some
cases, we think it's now becoming
possible to go tell the AI to to think
for a bit and then come back to you and
have the API be a little bit more like
the API with another human being.
And we think you want that all to work
well together. So, you know, the AI can
come back to you with 70% of something
and then you can bring it into the
foreground really quickly, work with it,
and then spin it back off to the
background. Um, and you know, as part of
having the AI spend a bunch of time um,
thinking in the background, to make that
thinking useful, you kind of needed to
run the code and then react to it, or
else it's just kind of staring at the
thing that it wrote and thinking more.
Maybe um, I'm supposed to be the one
answering the questions rather than, uh,
asking them. But do you think in 5 years
uh, the main thing that I'm looking at
in cursor will be code or something
else? Um I think it might be something
else. I think that uh there are uh big
big big simplification but kind of when
you're defining what a piece of software
is there's like the uh logic component
which is what engineers spend a lot of
time on of designing exactly how the
software works. There's also for end
user applications and things that have
gooies there's like this visual
component and I think that there is you
know maybe it's gonna be us maybe it's
gonna be someone else there is a future
version of the world where um the way
you interact with AI is a little bit
less like you know it's a human helper
that you're delegating work to or
looking over your shoulder predicting
the next set of things you're going to
do and instead it's a little bit more of
an advance in compiler or interpreter
technology and it could lead you to a
world where programming languages
actually change and they can start to
get a little bit less formal they can
start to get a little bit higher level
uh they can start be a little bit more
about uh what you want and a little
little bit less about how you do it. Um
and I think that it won't look like a
Google doc necessarily. I think that
there are things you want to keep around
from programming like that, you know,
the naming of logic somewhere and then
using that in a bunch of other places. I
think that there's also this other
element too of the visuals of you know
what a piece of software looks like and
I think you know maybe us maybe some
other tool but I think there's a world
where kind of direct manipulation of the
UI starts to play a little bit more into
it. Um, but these are kind of far-flung
experimental ideas. Um, and um,
in general I will say and yeah, it's not
terrible, but um,
I feel like there just it's interesting
to me that we haven't
experimented in some sense that much
with the paradigm of programming over
the past 20 years. And many of the
things we're discussing here are from
the 80s or the 70s. Uh, and um, you
know, there are way more developers
obviously now than there ever have been
in the past. But in some sense the sort
of the aperture of of um of
experimentation there feels like it's
it's really not that wide. And again the
JavaScript ecosystem and a couple of
others have done some cool things and
and there's been a lot of even you know
experimentation at the language level
with Rust and Go and everything else but
but at the kind of the development
environment level I don't I don't know
why it is but maybe it's just too hard
and complicated now but there's been
less than what would have expected.
Yeah I agree and um I think
maybe this helps
something we're working on. Yeah,
hopefully this explains Cursor's success
to some extent where, you know, you guys
are the first people to really take it
seriously in quite a while.
Well, I I mean, yeah, I think we also
benefit a lot from the Y now of like
there's now this, you know, great new
color to paint with um or set of colors
to paint with. Um I think also there's
just a ton of lock in with programming
languages around both the neurons in
your head of like programming languages
are kind of complex UI for programmers
to define exactly how the computer
should function. And so, you know,
people learn languages and those, you
know, uh people don't like to learn that
many things. Um, and then there's also
the lock in of you have a lot lot of
logic sitting around in one language and
you need to maintain that. And I
actually think that that's a pretty
interesting or one of our hopes is that
as AI um programming gets better and
better and better. One of the downsides
of working on professional applications
with hundreds of people dealing with
many millions of lines of logic is the
weight of the codebase really starts to
weigh on you.
Um, and so the the feeling of being in a
net new codebase where it's just
everything feels effortless goes away.
Everything's, you know, a chore. you
have to um you know change one thing
here breaks you know something else here
and it becomes kind of this big ball of
mud um and um making that effortless
reducing the kind of weight of an
existing set of logic I think is you
know one of the areas in which AI can
you know make programming better so
someone said on Twitter today
maybe it was Andre Karpathy but maybe
I'm misattributing that and you know may
too many things to do with vibe coding
get attributed to Andre like you know to
Churchill or Einstein or something but
but I think about him um but um uh this
person whoever was was making
observation that you know it's one thing
to be prompting the creation of code but
another place where AI could conceivably
do a lot to help is in the
beautifification and the refactoring of
code bases and you can imagine that you
know you're producing all this you know
a little bit ungainainely not quite
correctly factored you know detritus at
the front and you have this um you know
and then nocturnally this thing comes up
behind you and
factored and the only CS class I ever
took was this from this class from Jerry
Susman uh on um on
was basically focused on I mean he
called it large scale symbolic systems
but really uh what he was trying to
focus on was the idea of creating code
bases and uh environments and uh
abstractions that were easy to modify
and like there were no assignments in
the class where you'd write something
from scratch. every assignment was about
modifying an existing system and
thinking about how could you design
things in such a way that those
modifications become and you know there
might be quite deep modifications um uh
become uh straightforward and I think
that's a lovely idea obviously in
practice it's often very difficult to do
that given all the exigencies and
pressures of the things you want to ship
you know today and next week and so
forth but if you could have an AI like
often when you're writing this stuff you
realize well I really should be doing it
the beautiful way but I'm not um maybe
we could have an AI coming up behind us
to clean it up
yes yes maybe soon One thing that
happens to a lot of developers that care
or a lot of people come to development
because they care about building things.
They want to make things happen on the
computer screen. And so then that leads
them to coding. And then something that
happens to uh you know a big group of
developers is they eventually realize
the software they want to create is is
too big that they can't write you know
all of the code themselves and they have
to go to humans to help them write the
code. And so they maybe they then become
an engineering manager, a director,
whatever it is. Maybe they start a
company, right? And then most of the
work becomes not typing code. becomes
you know coordinating amongst people. Do
you think that there are any ideas from
programming that are helpful for the act
of kind of programming amongst the
organization to get a group of people to
uh to build software together?
Interesting. I think taking uh APIs and
data models
really seriously. If I was to do
everything at Stripe again, um I mean
there's a million small things that you
would do differently and even some some
kind of big things, but the the thing
that I think we could maybe foreseeably
and beneficially done differently um
would be to have spent even more time
than we did on APIs and data models. and
you know part part of the reason is um
is the uh the um I guess Conway's law
effect of how you know both of those
things end up shaping the the
organization. So I guess if you don't
deeply internalize that then uh maybe
you've less control over the uh
organizational dynamics than you might
otherwise like to have. Um but also I I
think it um it ends up shaping not only
I mean the the weak version of Conway's
law is that it uh it shapes your
organization. I think the strong version
is that it substantially shapes your
strategy uh and and just your your
business outcomes. And this isn't
exactly
maybe a version of that that but I often
reflect on how the iOS software
ecosystem um for a very long time and
you know plausibly still today was so
much more vibrant and kind of vital and
um successful than the uh Android app
ecosystem. And you know, there's a lot
of things that are different across
across those two um ecosystems. Um there
are now way more Android devices in use,
I believe, than uh than iOS devices. Um
but I think much of the um the fact that
app developers tended to prefer um
building their apps on iOS and releasing
their apps first on iOS and maybe the
iOS version being better than the
Android version or you know, whatever.
um is because the the frameworks uh and
the abstractions for iOS were just
originally better than the than the
Android ones. Uh and so but I think
that's a case where the right API
design, the right abstraction design uh
ended up having just quite significant
business ramifications. And you know, I
think there's kind of a sense that maybe
it's not worth dwelling on these things
because you know everything in
technology changes so rapidly and uh you
know whatever assumptions you make
they'll be you know obsolete in two
years or something. I think in practice
that's not true. uh and that like the
right API design and the right
abstraction to the right data models can
really endure and you know for the first
versions of iOS many of the classes that
one used were prefixed with NS and
that's of course standing for next step
right and so that's a case where the API
design survived for you know two decades
um or more and in the case of stripe you
know stripe is now 15 years old and you
know there were lots of things we
designed 15 years ago that are still you
know in use today which is you know kind
of good and bad in the sense that they
they endured but also we still um you
know uh um we are still uh under the uh
the
living with their faults.
Exactly. Uh and so anyway that that
that's maybe the thing that I would um
that's the first thing that comes to
mind. In fact, on that final note, I was
talking with uh an engineering leader
at, you know, kind of a preeminent
successful Silicon Valley private
company and um they were talking about
how their codebase is largely in Scala
and uh they said that they like to think
of kind of the the beginnings of the
startup as this big bang moment where
this these you know tired, overworked,
um maybe overcaffeinated founding team
members are willy-nilly making these
initial technical decisions that then
dictate the lives of hundreds of
professional engineers in the future and
that scholar choice was one of them. Uh
and they sort of live with live with the
faults of that um now but um what what
are those kind of uh what were the
consequential it could be good or bad uh
initial conditions of the the stripe big
bang that you guys still live with right
now?
Um I mean I think that
metaphor is is
well it sounds true to me um is is the
first thing I'd say. I mean maybe
there's a little bit of kind of
survivorship bias uh where like the
actual statement is the uh the early
decisions we made
that we never changed are decisions that
we lived with but you know there's a
kind of tautology there or something um
and there are certainly design decisions
we made pretty early on that you know
are are not true today. So you know
early versions of um the dashboard or
something were built extraordinarily
differently to you know the dashboard of
today
and the converse is also true. So uh you
know initially we decided to use MongoDB
at Stripe and we decided to use Ruby at
Stripe uh and those are still quite
foundational technologies uh uh at
Stripe and uh you know we had to build a
lot of you know infrastructure in order
to make uh MongoDB as fault tolerant and
as distributed and as um durable and as
reliable and everything as
we needed it to be and as it now is. uh
like we had uh Stripe's critical API
availability last year was 99.99986%.
Uh which is 44 seconds of unavail
unavailability through the whole year.
Um uh which is we we think others don't
publish statistics that are kind of as
granular but we believe that is the best
in the industry. Um so uh so you know
that everything that our storage team
has built and many other teams uh you
know it ended up really working there
but that that was a quite important
critical decision. um initial decision
uh and you know Ruby similarly I guess
companies sometimes change languages uh
you know along the way but I but I feel
like the initial language chosen tends
to have
heard there were there were debates in
Stripe about or one of actually one of
our co-founders um internet stripe early
on um or not early on in Stripe's
history early on in kind of our
collective personal history um and uh he
remembers there being documents upon
documents about a potential Java
migration. Yeah. So we um that partly
happened um as in we have rewritten a
bunch of key services on Java. Um so
some services for rich I don't know
throughput throughput in particular um
is uh is really important and
if you torture Ruby enough and you know
maybe rewrite uh parts of it uh you know
parts of some um some hot paths uh in C
or something you know you you can get it
to be pretty fast but you're often
fighting against the allocator and uh
you know various parts of even just like
Ruby strings are not that efficient and
stuff. So we we we've rewritten certain
services in Java and um now we use both.
Why did you or did you consider anything
other than and uh why did you pick
early on?
And what was the what was the RFC
process, RFP process, decision-m process
for that?
It was just me and John. So you know we
were sitting on the couch like should we
use Yeah, fine. Um, did they did
they get through to you with like a a a
blog? Was it um the just the reputation
of at the time and open source
communities something else?
I think it was so I I I wrote a data
store for our um for our prior company
uh and um object- based data store and I
didn't really like SQL. I I thought it
was there was too much of a
translational kind of mismatch between
the domain of the application and you
know that which SQL natively um you know
makes expressible and so
you know with SQL obviously you have to
collapse down into you know a relatively
restricted set of primitive forms
whereas in your application you know you
might have a concept of
I don't know let's say in the case of
stripe of money that doesn't like
exactly comport with how the particular
SQL database you're happens to represent
money or you know whatever the case
might be. Um and so I just had this like
principled objection to to to SQL and
I'm not not endorsing this or saying it
was good but um I um as as as this
interview shows I suppose uh I had all
sorts of you know strange notions about
technology um and with Stripe we wanted
to be more mainstream uh than uh and a
little bit more um you know a little bit
uh less heterodox in our technology
choices than our prior company. And so
instead of using small talk, you know,
okay, we weren't going to go to Java,
but we went to Ruby, which at least on a
relative basis seemed more mainstream.
And similarly, rather than write our own
object database, we went relatively more
mainstream and used which still
give a lot of flexibility, you know, by
virtue of being a kind of a kind of
object data store. Um, so that was fine.
Um,
everything I've said might disqualify me
from, you know, ever making technology
choices for, uh, for another company,
but, um,
would you do anything differently about
Stripe 2?
We haven't talked that much about it
publicly yet. Uh, and the answer might
be a bit like, um, you know, there's the
uh, the Juan Lie quote about um, the um,
Denging um, about the the French
Revolution. You know, it's too soon to
judge. Um and so back in 2022
I believe um we I mean to this
discussion about data models and
abstractions we realized that a couple
of the core abstractions in Stripe were
just not the right long-term
abstractions and we uh we had to fix
that. Um and so we designed a bunch of
v2 APIs. Fortunately we had contemplated
the possibility of this early stripe.
So, you know, most of the uh the, you
know, REST URIs that uh people are
familiar with in Stripe are prefixed
with SLV1. They've been prefixed with
SLV1 from, you know, 2010. Uh and uh and
so then in 2022, we decided, okay, we
might use the uh the uh you know, we
might increment the uh the namespace. Um
so, we designed those new APIs. They've
started to ship uh this year. And
congratulations.
Thank you. Um and we're extremely
excited about the functionality that
it's going to enable and you know
without getting into the arcana of it
you know they will enable things like
historically uh we have um we have drawn
distinctions and represented separately
things like end customers things like
sub accounts things like recipients for
different kinds of payments and we're
unifying all those into being um you
know into the same kind of um entity
representation which is on some level
clearly the right answer and you know
makes a lot of um will and uh is already
ch uh changing the businesses of some of
our customers because uh they can you
know enable their users to do various
things without having to re-enter
details or maybe to bring the same
account across different countries or
you know whatever the case might be.
Anyway, it's been a a long journey. Um,
and the reason it was a long journey is
um
I guess because
the it's it's not that useful to just
define these APIs in isolation. If we
just wanted to define them in isolation,
that's a pretty easy thing to do. Uh the
thing that's difficult is to make them
interoperable with all the existing
things at Stripe and to build
translation layers uh and so forth. Um
and uh and then to figure out with our
customers what a sensible upgrade path,
you know, might look like because we
control our codebase. We don't control
theirs. Uh and so it's maybe a I don't
want to exaggerate it, but in certain
respects at least, it feels a bit more
like an instruction set migration for,
you know, a chip architecture or
something where you the instruction set
by itself is easy, but it's all the kind
of coexistence questions that that
become hard. But hey, it's hard to ship
this year and we're we're excited about
it. I mean, I I guess your question was
maybe what what lessons we've learned
from it and
and maybe is there do you think there's
anything bigger to draw out of that on
either projects that are are rewrites or
thinking about these kind of decades
long abstractions
and how to do that? Well,
my trit
answer to that is to unify everything
you can plausibly unify. And
how did you test design ideas for V2?
Well, the people designing it. Um, well,
I'll give you one other lesson and then
I'll answer that question. So, just the
other lesson just maybe a bit cheap.
And also, there's some chief API
designer who's kind of the the
mastermind of and it's one person. It's
not some sort of working group.
There is a working group. There are
working groups, but there is also a
singular person who understands and is
more than anyone else responsible for
the whole
and and I think that's necessary. Yeah.
Yeah. Um my other kind of trite
exhortation would be to make anything
that plausibly could be an n bym
relationship to support that because if
you only support one to n or n to one or
you know whatever you'll in and even if
it's nonobvious how it could possibly be
end to end just inevitably you you'll
you'll um you'll end up needing that and
you know you'll think well you could
never have you know a company that's
owned by two different companies or
something but you know it turns out that
sort of every permutation in the space
uh is uh is in fact uh eventually
eventually explored. Um
as to you know how to how to do that.
Well, I I really feel like it's um like
these new APIs we we think they're the
well you asked the question, how do we
know they're the right APIs? um partly
from showing early versions of them to
customers, partly because the people who
designed them had spent many many years
in the um you know uh um witnessing and
living with the shortcomings of the
prior versions. So you know we were kind
of coming with uh strong opinions but
but but even the strong opinions I mean
one can sometimes you know predict
wrongly or extrapolate wrongly or
overengineer something or whatever. So I
think the cycles of customer validation
customer feedback are are extremely
important. I think it's also very
important if we did a lot of this to
literally write the integrations that
would exist in the new world because I
mean you really I mean I think Java is
maybe an example of yes it fixes a bunch
of problems you know with memory
management or whatever that existed with
C or C++ and and anticedants but at the
cost of a lot of prolixity and uh and uh
overhead um and in order to kind of
safeguard ourselves against you
inadvertently overengineering things. We
forced ourselves to uh to write a lot of
API code specifically describing uh how
we would implement various business
models and flows and so forth just to
make sure that when you when you look at
it, it feels right. But I don't want to
endorse our approaches too strongly just
yet. I mean, I'm feeling very
optimistic, but uh you know, it's we're
we're
fraction, but
60 70% done or something, but not like
100%. And so I don't want to know
prematurely declare any victory.
How do you Patrick Collison use AI?
Well, I
the main ways are the predictable ones
where I use LLM chat tools um uh a lot.
Uh and
and I
use them for
mainly for answering qu kind of factual
or empirical questions that I'm curious
about. Uh so for for deep research style
questions, I don't always use deep
research and now that the LMS are
getting better at tool use and just
navigating the web themselves, you know,
you don't need need deep research as
much. Um but for answering empirical or
or factual questions, um I wish they
were useful for for writing. Uh but I I
usually end up dissatisfied with the
writing that they produce. Um so I I I
don't really use them very much for
that. And even for editing or or or
grading my own writing, I I mean,
have you seen any improvements as the
models have progressed in the writing?
And I agree. Also, it's they're
surprisingly generic.
Yes.
And um
I'm trying to prompt it to like not
generic.
Yes. Inserting names of people who um
and it just doesn't work. And so I have
been disappointed the times when I've
given it.
Can people tell me that the base models
um are are better at this? Um and it's
the sort of normification of oral HF
that you know puts it in um in some kind
of you know attractor basin. Um
yeah I I I have not succeeded in uh in
using them effectively there. uh people
say that claude is better and 03 is
better than earlier open eye models and
and on a relative basis that might be
true but I and I don't want to sound um
you know um you know self auditory here
and suggesting that I'm you know some
particularly talented writer. I don't
think I am. It's just like my personal
style um differs from the personal style
so to speak of the models. And um you
know in some self-centered way I when I
write I want to use my personal style.
Um so I use them for for the the factual
stuff a lot and and I find them like
terrific for that. And uh you know even
when I'm reading a book I'll sometimes
activate I've been recently using
Grock's voice mode. Um and I'll just
passively ask questions while I'm
reading and you know Grock is just
listening in the background and you know
the answers are are are very helpful. Um
and then I obviously use LMS for writing
code and um you know typically mediated
through cursor.
So we are interviewing you Patrick
Collison as kind of uh the most if you
had to pick the architect archetype of a
software industrialist. I feel like you
would be kind of straight out of central
casting um uh for a number of reasons.
One is that you are running a large
software company um successful large
software company. two is you started as
a programmer and then you know moved to
running the company. Um and then three
is the company also builds things for
developers and so it's kind of the the
intersection of you know uh many circles
in the van diagram. Um and so it's
helpful to hear about um you know
discussing kind of experiences with
stripe um we are also interviewing
Patrick Collison the moonlighting um
um um economist and student of the
world. And so, um, are progress studies
doomed now that AI is here? Is there any
need for them?
Well, I was going to say I think the
need for progress studies is increased,
but again, I don't mean to suggest that
proper noun progress studies sees
increased need. But I think the kinds of
questions that progress studies tries to
answer uh are um are now more pressing
and urgent because I think the degrees
of freedom are increasing. uh and I
think there's some pandasian view that
AI will just magically solve all the
problems and you know predictions of the
future are hard but one I don't think
that's true and two I in as much as we
have you know evidence to date I don't
think that's been the track record so I
think that you know how we use these
things what kinds of decisions we make
what kind of um you know considerations
and you know uh margins
of human welfare we seek to further you
know I think all those those judgments
are are going to really matter and maybe
a critique you could have leveled um at
progress studies or progress studies
style thinking 5 years ago is these are
all nice questions but the world is on a
kind of um forained escalator path to
you know some kind of teological outcome
and I don't think the world feels that
way today or certainly it feels much
less that way today than it did and so
because of global affairs or anything
else?
No. Um I mean maybe somewhat global
affairs but the trifecta of um yeah
global affairs at large. Second, I think
that aspirations and ideals are becoming
contested more actively and you know
there's an ambiguity these days in you
know the US as to what the left and the
right even stand for and you know I
guess we currently have one party
endorsing tariffs and another party
opposing them but with the veilance has
kind of shift uh flipped from what what
one might have expected uh historically.
And then third, yeah, obviously
technology and
first and foremost AI, but you know, in
our industry, stable coins, the rise of
China as the preeminent manufacturing
power in many technologies of the future
like drones and robots and batteries and
solar, you know, etc. So yeah, in in
many different ways I feel like the
future is is um you know um Peter
Schwarz um has this concept of you know
the Schwarz window as the um the window
of you know contemplatable futures uh in
you know some whatever number of years
hence and I feel like that Schwarz
window uh uh you know as of say 2005 as
we contemplate the world of 2015 was
fairly narrow and was correctly fairly
narrow. I think the world of 2015 did in
fact unfold largely the way we would
have expected in 2005 and I feel like
today in 2025
that window for 2035 like it feels
extremely broad. Um so um yeah I think
the progress studies style questions are
are are more pressing.
So you were on the record um in I think
saying that people should focus more on
the question of why we don't see
improvements in productivity numbers um
as information technology increases and
also as uh more people have started
working on science and technology um and
more money has gone into it. Um and what
do the numbers look like now? Do we see
AI in the numbers?
There was a new paper published on this
very recently like the past couple of
days um that I've not had a chance to. I
I just queued it today to read. Um so
I've at this moment only read the
abstract. Its claim uh is that one does
not in fact observe uh productivity
improvements stemming from um
from uh from use of language models.
Um now I certainly can't do
you know what they're looking at? they
appear to be undertaking some kind of
natural experiment looking at the
individual level based on um based on uh
intensity of LLM usage but I certainly
cannot endorse their methodological
rigor and upon understanding it better
you know I might be I might be either
really impressed and find it very
credible or horrified I don't know um
but that was just the finding I happened
to to to stumble upon today I mean look
overall GDP growth in the US looks well
over the last two years it's been
somewhat better than we expected.
Um obviously, you know, we're we're
speaking right now at a a kind of
volatile time, we certainly don't see
any evidence for exponential takeoff. Um
and if we, you know, in as much as we
thought that the encouraging GDP figures
we have seen in the US over the last two
years are attributable to some of these
new technologies, I think you would also
expect to see them in other countries,
right? Because these technologies are
quasi public good. Anybody can, you
know, um can uh can use these LLMs. GDP
growth outside of the US has has not
been that encouraging. We're we're not
living in some, you know, massively
accelerated period of economic growth
for the world writ large. Uh and so, you
know, obviously it's it's early days. Uh
but uh I think um you know, I I think
we're seeing that the diffusion of these
technologies through the economy uh
really takes time and uh in involves
substantial complexity. And maybe just
last point on that is um I believe Jack
Clark said in an interview with Tyler
Cohen, one of the co-founders of
Anthropic and you know Anthropic to some
extent has well Anthropic has always
taken the concept of AGI and even ASI I
feel extremely seriously and you know
Dario speaks about this publicly he um
he he's written about it you know etc.
And again Jack Clark one of the
co-founders and he said that he expects
uh AI to uh increase GDP growth by half%
a year. Uh, and I thought that I mean I
I interpret Jack as as really an
optimist and you know half a point a
year is in fact a lot of incremental GDP
when compounded. So I'm not saying that
that's small but uh I think uh I think
it's interesting that that was his
figure.
Yes. Do you think that uh with the form
factor that AI is taking in the economy
right now um if we just kind of uh
stretch the line forward do you think
we're going to need new measures in
economic productivity than we have right
now? So like assume real productivity
goes up. Assume that AI keeps getting
better. It gets kind of deployed in the
ways you would expect. Do you think
we'll need new measures or it should
show up in the numbers?
No. No, I don't think so. Like like I
don't think I'm not saying that GDP is
perfect. I think GDP can be improved but
um but I in in any world where what we
you know generally think of um as the
economy is massively enhanced, it'll
show up in GDP.
Y when will we be able to program human
biology? I'm very excited about this. At
ARC, which is this biomedical research
organization which I was uh involved in
uh founding, we're working on training
foundation models for biology using DNA
and uh things like that. Um we're
working on a virtual cell. Um and uh and
generally we're trying I mean a thing
that I think is that I didn't appreciate
until really spending more time in
biology is we've never like we humanity
have never cured a complex disease. Uh
so you know one one ontology or schema
or something of of diseases would be you
know you have infectious diseases the
flu the cold covid whatever um uh and
you know tuberculosis and you know uh uh
very diseases with high mortality rates
uh then uh you have monogenic diseases
where you know there's just sort of one
genetic mutation that is um responsible
for the disease like Huntington's and
then you have complex diseases uh and
the complex diseases are kind of the
residual that are now after we've cured
most of the problematic infectious
diseases at least in the western world.
Um most cardiovascular disease, most
cancers, most autoimmune disease, most
neurodeenerative disease etc. For
certain of these conditions, we have
maybe treatments that help like statins
with cardiovascular disease. But for
none of them can we really say that
we've cured it, that we like understand
the causal pathways and you know
meaningful detail and that you know it's
just you know we can we can vaccinate
against it or something. Um and I think
this is our hypothesis you could be
wrong is that this is in part because we
don't have uh experimental and kind of
maybe epistemic is too grandiose a word
but kind of epistemic technology that's
up to the task like the um the plyotropy
of the genes in terms of all the
different parts of the body and the
systems and the mechanisms inside the
cell that they affect is so you know
there's so combinatoric complexity there
and then you know the environment is
such a vast and you know difficult to
quantify thing that just it's it's
really hard to understand for any of
these conditions you know the ideology
and the dynamics and so forth okay then
over the last 10ish years I mean a bit
longer but a lot of the development has
happened the last 10 years we've gotten
um we've gotten three new classes of
technology in biology um for reading
we've gotten and much better sequencing
technology, single cell sequencing, the
ability to sequence, you know, single
cell sequencing of RNA um and those
improvements at the kind of think level.
Uh we um you know we've gotten neural
networks and deep learning and
transformers and you know everything
everything there or I mean they've
existed for a long time but we've gotten
the recent improvements uh uh in them uh
and the transformer in particular. Uh
and then on the right side we've seen
obviously huge improvements in
functional genomics and crisper and uh
you know bridge editing which which is a
technology that kind of arc but the
ability to kind of make very specific
directed perturbations in cells. But if
you put those together you now have the
ability to again at the kind of level of
the individual cell to uh read think and
to write. And this starts to really feel
like a new kind of touring loop and to
have its own sort of completeness. Um
and you know we will see how much uh
this can do against uh these complex
diseases and whether sort of this
systematic approach is up to um up to
the task of um of shedding new light on
their dynamics. But we are hopeful and
excited
if we here at Kerser and also others in
the industry are successful in
automating lots of programming as we
know it today and um you know replacing
it with a form of software building
that's much higher level and more
productive and um is much more just
focused on defining what you would like
the software to look like. Um if we you
know succeed in that um uh uh who are
you long? You know people talk about the
the designers and how you know this will
be like a renaissance for them but um
you know are you long the the the grad
students? I mean there are lots of
really really amazing grad students who
uh who are awesome and then uh maybe are
less less skilled at making things
happen on computers. Um but who do you
think you know is the most unexpected
beneficiary of a world where both many
more people can make things on computers
and then also you know especially if
it's an evolution away from programming
um you know the people who are already
making things on computers are much much
much more productive.
I don't have a high confidence answer to
that. You know, there's all sorts of
trit stock answers like real assets,
especially constrained real assets. Um,
you know, maybe we should be long SF
real estate, uh, or something. Um,
because, um, you know, it is, uh, it is
one of the most beautiful cities in the
world and will be enduringly so. Maybe
we should be longing the inputs and the
ingredients to these systems because,
you know, demand uh, for for them will
go parabolic. And so, maybe we should be
long copper. um maybe we should belong
um positional goods and celebrities and
you know Taylor Swift's music catalog.
Yeah, there's a lot of I think
compelling theories here. But part of
what I think is interesting at this
economic moment uh is the
unpredictability and the contingency and
kind of sensitivity to the precise
assumptions in the technology trajectory
itself. Um and the shape that it takes
in five or 10 years or whatever I think
is going to do a lot to determine the
answer to that. And as I look backwards
over the last couple years, I'm struck
by how many predictions have held up,
you know, reasonably poorly. Uh, and you
know, even from people who are on the
face of it, you know, extremely well
informed. Uh, and so, um, I've asked a
lot of people this question and I have
not heard any answers that are so
compelling that I feel like I have
conviction.
So, we, uh, are very happy to be serving
Stripe and your guys mission. Uh, what
would you like us to build? Um, how can
we make Kusher better for you? Either
you, Patrick Collison, or you Stripe?
Well, you guys are already making Stripe
better. So, um, you know, keep doing
what you're doing is, uh, would would
not be a bad outcome from our vantage
point. Um, cursor has uh today hundreds
and soon thousands of extremely
enthusiastic strip employees who are
daily users uh of uh of cursor and they
report that it's a you know very
significant productivity uh enhancement
um and so
wait for the economic numbers
uh well you know the economy is pretty
big um and these diffusions take time
so you know it seems kind of greedy to
uh to want more if you're already
making, you know, Stripe spends more on
R&D and software creation than we spend
on, you know, any single undertaking.
And so, if you're making that process
more efficient and more productive,
then, you know, maybe it seems greedy to
want anything more.
Um, if I'm being selfish, okay, three
things,
correct?
The runtime characteristics and
integration stuff that we just
discussed, I think would be really
valuable. I think the the refactoring
and the beautifification stuff that
again we also talked about I think would
be extremely helpful and and and I think
really change our degrees of freedom as
in if you could lower the cost of future
changes to Stripe um and improve the
quality of the architecture and then
third we really care about um what we
call at Stripe craft and beauty uh and
we want our we want our software to be
welldesigned and pleasant to use and
pleasant to use not only in the
superficial, you know, um, pixel sense,
uh, but also in the deep it works very
well sense. Uh, and, uh, is something
you can set up and, you know, largely
forget about and just trust or forget
about it in as much as you want to. You
know, there there's obviously a concern
with AI that it leads to the creation of
more slop um, and more kind of crappy
things, but not more of the best things.
I don't know what it would be that
cursor would do to
um ensure that the world is creating
more of the best software and not just
more software. But I think that's an
interesting and important uh dimension.
So those would be my I mean besides all
the obvious things to do, those would be
three suggestions.
Amazing. Thank you, Patrick.
All right. Thank you for having me. Yes.